# Visualizing While Memorializing 
Final Project <br>
Lu Rodrigues / December 16
### Description
# Background:
My project is an attempt to create a space where I can visualize a snapshot of the relationship I had with my father. On April 20th, 2018, my dad passed away after a relatively short battle with cancer. Through the grieving process, I've found a lot of comfort in looking back at old photos, text messages, and old voicemails. I’ve found that although at times it hurts to look at these artifacts and realize they are all I have now that he’s gone, I also find a lot of comfort in knowing I have them. Putting them on this website not only felt very cathartic, as I got to sort, parce, and even relive some of the memories I came across but it also felt like a safe backup. I worry everyday about what if something happens to our texts or that voicemail on the website, so I felt so much comfort in being able to have just another backup that all of it is stored on. 
# Purpose / Goal:
I started this project with just the simple goal of creating a memorial of sorts to honor the communication I had with my dad. As the project progressed, I realized that it could serve as a way to communicate to others a simple and somewhat lofi way of memorializing the virtual artifacts they have of their loved ones. Overall, I wanted this project to just simply communicate how much I love my father and how much I value these simple texts and virtual interactions and I hope this can inspire others perhaps needing the same relief in their coping process. 
https://looful.wixsite.com/dataviz/process
### Project Procedure: 
# Data Processing:
To process the data, which in this case was all of the text messages between my father and I, I sat down with my data viz professor Joey to help me download and organize all of my text data. It was, of course, not nearly as easy as it seemed. It was important though, to make sure that we were doing this correctly and not just sending in my texts to a third party program to easily download and organize all of them for me because that could not only put me at risk of having every conversation in my messages available to anyone, but it also could put all those I’ve ever texted with at risk as well. Big lesson here, we have to be careful with the data we do choose to share online. <br>
So, we needed to pull all of the texts I had stored in my computer - which is important to note were *not* all the texts - as my computer only had some of them stored and backed up on it. We then had to pull out only the messages between my father and I, organize them onto a spreadsheet, and then begin parsing through. The biggest hiccup of all this was deciphering the timestamp that came with each message. It was a bit of a challenge to be able to translate the time stamp from the UNIX timestamp it was in into a regular, easily understandable timestamp. Once this task was complete, I went on my way to organize and understand what this data was telling me. <br>
The first thing I noted was the frequency in which we communicate, the frequency in which certain words and phrases came up, and the amount of times I would text my father first versus the amount of times he would text me first. Something else I began to notice was that the messages we pulled were not all complete. I realized that my computer did not have all my texts backed up on it, as I mentioned above. This led me to 1. Panic and 2. Begin to work with the data by hand. I went through and scrolled through all our messages and began to tally mark certain phrases and incorporate the frequency of texts into the number I had generated using the spreadsheet of data. This was the most interesting part of the process because despite taking much more time to work through, it allowed me to relive some really precious moments I had with my dad through these conversations. This was actually very rewarding.  <br>
The last step was simple, I made visuals and found a medium in which to organize all this data into a visually appealing way.

## Visualization Selection:
I chose a simple pie chart to communicate how much my father would initiate contact versus how many times I would. I chose a line graph to demonstrate how our text message frequency began to drop the sicker he got. I find this interesting because it could tell many stories, but the truth is, the sicker my father got, the more I felt like he retreated into himself. I would try to spend as much time as possible with him before he passed, which could also explain why our texting frequency dropped, but I also began to see him grow more and more distant. <br>
I chose to demonstrate the frequency of the phrase “I love you” and the word “chief” with simple blocks to give more of a feel to the viewer that those came up quite a bit. Only one block is clickable, as I wanted to make more clickable, I realized I didn’t want to share everything. Some memories I want to keep just for myself.

# Analysis Post-Visualization:
Walking away from this, I really want to find the opportunity to code the entire thing myself, especially with some of the effects I can incorporate with p5.js. Ideally, the scroll of the entire page would be different as well as the way the messages appear, I’d like them to disappear as you scroll through. <br>
I think an overall challenge I want to think more on is how to make this is some sort of version of this easily scalable to others out there interested in creating the same thing. <br>
This project gave me a lot to work on and through, and finally, this project not only convinced me I’ve been working on the wrong thesis project, but gave me - I think - the strength I needed to switch topics.
